docs/configuration.md, before:

# Configuration & Environment Variables

This page lists the main knobs you can use to tune GlossAPI.

## GPU & Providers

- `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES`: restrict/assign visible GPUs, e.g. `export CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0,1`.
- `GLOSSAPI_DOCLING_DEVICE`: preferred device for Docling (inside a worker), e.g. `cuda:0`.
- `GLOSSAPI_GPU_BATCH_SIZE`: batch size for GPU extraction workers (multi-GPU mode).
- macOS Apple Silicon (Metal/MPS): use `accel_type='MPS'` or set `GLOSSAPI_DOCLING_DEVICE=mps` for the
  `c.extract()` path.  When calling `c.ocr(backend='rapidocr')` the accelerator is **auto-detected**
  (`mps` on macOS, `cuda` on Linux/Windows when available, `auto` otherwise) — no explicit
  `accel_type` argument is required for that code path.
- `DOCLING_PERF_PAGE_BATCH_SIZE`: number of PDF pages Docling processes per Metal/CUDA dispatch iteration.
  Defaults to `32` on macOS Apple Silicon and `16` on all other platforms.  Larger values amortise
  per-dispatch scheduling overhead on M-series hardware.  Override to tune for your document size:
  ```bash
  export DOCLING_PERF_PAGE_BATCH_SIZE=64  # very long PDFs on Apple Silicon
  ```

## Model Weights

All model weights are stored under a single root directory controlled by `GLOSSAPI_WEIGHTS_ROOT`:

- `GLOSSAPI_WEIGHTS_ROOT`: root directory for all model weights (default: `<repo>/model_weights`). Each backend stores weights in a subdirectory:

```
model_weights/              # $GLOSSAPI_WEIGHTS_ROOT
├── deepseek-ocr/           # DeepSeek OCR V1 CUDA/vLLM weights
├── deepseek-ocr-1-mlx/     # DeepSeek OCR V1 MLX weights (macOS Apple Silicon)
├── deepseek-ocr-mlx/       # DeepSeek OCR v2 MLX weights
├── glm-ocr-mlx/            # GLM-OCR MLX weights
├── olmocr/                 # OlmOCR-2 CUDA/vLLM weights
├── olmocr-mlx/             # OlmOCR-2 MLX weights (macOS Apple Silicon)
└── mineru/                 # MinerU PDF-Extract-Kit models
```

Individual backend directories can be overridden with their respective env vars (e.g. `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_MODEL_DIR`, `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_MODEL_DIR`, `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_MODEL_DIR`, `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MLX_MODEL_DIR`) for advanced use cases. When set, they take precedence over the weights root convention. In most setups only `GLOSSAPI_WEIGHTS_ROOT` is needed.

## OCR & Parsing

- `GLOSSAPI_IMAGES_SCALE`: image scale hint for OCR/layout (default ~1.1–1.25).
- `GLOSSAPI_FORMULA_BATCH`: inline CodeFormula batch size (default `16`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OCR_LANGS`: override OCR language list (comma-separated).
- `GLOSSAPI_SKIP_DOCLING_BOOT`: set to `1` to skip Docling/RapidOCR patching at import time (useful in environments without Docling).

### Batch Policy & PDF Backend

GlossAPI exposes two Phase‑1 profiles. Use `Corpus.extract(..., phase1_backend='docling')` to switch from the default safe backend. The legacy environment variables `GLOSSAPI_BATCH_POLICY` and `GLOSSAPI_BATCH_MAX` are still parsed for backward compatibility but emit a deprecation warning and will be removed in a future release.

Regardless of backend, the extractor clamps OMP/OpenBLAS/MKL pools to one thread per worker so multi‑GPU runs do not explode thread counts.

### DeepSeek-OCR optional dependencies

Install the CUDA/vLLM extras to enable the DeepSeek-OCR path on Linux with an
NVIDIA GPU.  Imports remain lazy, so the package itself is always optional.

```bash
pip install '.[deepseek-ocr]'

# Install Torch CUDA 12.1 wheels (required by the DeepSeek-OCR script)
pip install --extra-index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu121 \
  'torch==2.5.1+cu121' 'torchvision==0.20.1+cu121'

# Alternatively, use the requirements file (edit to uncomment torch lines):
pip install -r deepseek-ocr/requirements-deepseek-ocr.txt
```

**Apple Silicon / MPS path** — on macOS, DeepSeek-OCR (V1) runs via
[mlx-vlm](https://github.com/Blaizzy/mlx-vlm) without vLLM.  No CUDA wheel is
needed.  Install the MPS extras instead:

```bash
pip install '.[deepseek-ocr-mlx]'
```

The model (`mlx-community/DeepSeek-OCR-8bit`) is downloaded automatically on
first use.  To keep it locally, set `GLOSSAPI_WEIGHTS_ROOT` pointing at your
weights directory; the model will be cached under
`<weights_root>/deepseek-ocr-1-mlx/`.

When using `backend='deepseek-ocr'`, equations are included inline in the OCR output; Phase‑2 math flags are accepted but skipped.

When using `backend='deepseek-ocr-2'`, equations are included inline in the OCR output; Phase-2 math flags are accepted but skipped.

When using `backend='mineru'`, equations are included inline in the OCR output; Phase‑2 math flags are accepted but skipped.

### DeepSeek-OCR runtime controls

The runner auto-detects the platform and selects the right execution path:

| Platform | Strategies tried (in order) |
|---|---|
| macOS (Apple Silicon) | In-process MLX → MLX CLI subprocess → stub |
| Linux / Windows (CUDA) | vLLM CLI subprocess → stub |

**Common controls:**

- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_ENABLE_STUB` (`1` by default): allow the builtin stub runner for tests and lightweight environments.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_DEVICE`: force device selection — `mps`, `cuda`, or `cpu`.  Auto-detected when unset (`mps` on macOS, `cuda` elsewhere).

**MPS / MLX controls (Apple Silicon):**

- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_ENABLE_MLX_OCR` (`1` by default on the MPS path): set to `0` to skip the MLX CLI subprocess strategy, or `1` to force it even when the kwarg says otherwise.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_MLX_MODEL_DIR`: local directory containing MLX-formatted weights and `config.json`. If unset, weights are resolved from `GLOSSAPI_WEIGHTS_ROOT/deepseek-ocr-1-mlx/` or auto-downloaded from `mlx-community/DeepSeek-OCR-8bit`.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_MLX_MODEL`: HuggingFace model ID for auto-download (default `mlx-community/DeepSeek-OCR-8bit`).
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_MLX_SCRIPT`: override path to the MLX CLI inference script. By default the package-shipped `mlx_cli.py` is used.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_TEST_PYTHON` / `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_PYTHON`: Python executable for the MLX CLI subprocess (defaults to the current interpreter).

**CUDA / vLLM controls (Linux):**

- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_ENABLE_OCR` (`0` by default): flip to `1` to force the real vLLM CLI even when the stub is allowed.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_VLLM_SCRIPT`: override path to the DeepSeek-OCR vLLM CLI script (defaults to `deepseek-ocr/run_pdf_ocr_vllm.py` under the repo).
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_MODEL_DIR`: path to CUDA model weights (must contain `config.json` + safetensors).
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_LD_LIBRARY_PATH`: prepend extra library search paths (e.g., for `libjpeg-turbo`) when launching the CLI.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_GPU_MEMORY_UTILIZATION`: VRAM fraction (0.5–0.9) for vLLM.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_NO_FP8_KV`: set to `1` to disable FP8 KV cache (propagates `--no-fp8-kv`).

### DeepSeek OCR v2 (MLX/MPS) runtime controls

The runner tries three strategies in order: **in-process** (fast, model stays loaded), **CLI subprocess**, then **stub**.

- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_ENABLE_STUB` (`1` by default): allow the builtin stub runner for tests and lightweight environments.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_ENABLE_OCR` (`0` by default): flip to `1` to force the CLI subprocess strategy.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_MODEL_DIR`: model directory containing MLX-formatted weights and config. If unset, models are auto-downloaded from `mlx-community/DeepSeek-OCR-2-8bit` on HuggingFace.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_DEVICE`: device override (`mps` or `cpu`, default `mps`).
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_MLX_SCRIPT`: override path to an external MLX CLI script. Only needed when using a separate venv or custom script. By default the package-shipped script is used.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_PYTHON` / `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_TEST_PYTHON`: absolute path to the Python interpreter for CLI subprocess mode (defaults to the current interpreter).

### MinerU runtime controls

- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_ENABLE_STUB` (`1` by default): allow the builtin stub runner for tests and lightweight environments.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_ENABLE_OCR` (`0` by default): flip to `1` to run `magic-pdf` when available.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_COMMAND`: override the `magic-pdf` executable path.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_MODE`: override the MinerU mode flag (passed to `magic-pdf -m`, default `auto`).
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_BACKEND`: override the MinerU backend (passed to `magic-pdf -b`, e.g. `pipeline`, `hybrid-auto-engine`, `vlm`).
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_DEVICE_MODE`: override the MinerU device mode (`mps`, `cuda`, or `cpu`). Requires `MINERU_TOOLS_CONFIG_JSON` to point at the base config.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_MPS_HIGH_WATERMARK_RATIO` (default `0.0`): controls `PYTORCH_MPS_HIGH_WATERMARK_RATIO` injected into the `magic-pdf` subprocess on macOS/MPS. `0.0` (the default) disables PyTorch's budget-based GC entirely — instead of firing synchronous in-process sweeps that stall the GPU command queue, PyTorch relies on macOS system memory pressure events (asynchronous, no GPU idle). PyTorch's own default is `1.7` (GC fires after allocating 1.7× the recommended budget). Any ratio-based GC adds stall overhead during MFR autoregressive decoding; the OS pressure mechanism avoids this. Set to `off` to skip injection and revert to PyTorch's 1.7 default. Set to any float > 0 (e.g. `1.0`) to use ratio-based GC at that threshold.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_MPS_LOW_WATERMARK_RATIO`: only relevant when high watermark > 0. Controls the drain target after GC fires. When high is `0.0`, this var is ignored. Auto-computed as `high - 0.2` when not set explicitly.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_MFR_BATCH_SIZE` (default `16` on MPS, MinerU default elsewhere): number of formula crops fed to UniMerNet per GPU batch. MinerU's own default (~64) causes unified-memory pressure on Apple Silicon, leading to MFR Predict throughput collapsing mid-stage (e.g. 25 it/s → <3 it/s). Values in the range `8`–`16` give more consistent sustained throughput. Set to `0` to leave MinerU's default untouched. Injected into the resolved `magic-pdf.json` at runtime via `formula-config.mfr_batch_size`.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_OCR_REC_BATCH_SIZE` (default `6` on MPS, MinerU default elsewhere): number of text crops decoded per OCR-rec batch. Controls `ocr-config.rec_batch_num` in the resolved config. Smaller values reduce peak memory and produce more even OCR-rec throughput; MinerU's own default is already modest (~6) so this mainly matters if you raise it for CUDA.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_LAYOUT_BATCH_SIZE`: batch size for layout detection (`layout-config.batch_size`). No MPS default is applied; set explicitly to override MinerU's default. A one-shot CNN, so less sensitive to batch size than MFR or OCR-rec.
- `MINERU_MIN_BATCH_INFERENCE_SIZE` (default `384` in MinerU, overridden to `50` by GlossAPI setup): number of pages processed per inference chunk. MinerU runs the full model stack (Layout, MFD, MFR, OCR) per chunk before moving to the next. Smaller values reduce the number of formula crops processed in a single MFR pass, limiting per-pass state accumulation. Larger values reduce the number of Layout/MFD warm-up invocations. Tune based on formula density and available memory.

#### MinerU doctor checks

Run the preflight checker to validate your CLI, config, device, and model paths:

```bash
python -m glossapi.ocr.mineru.preflight
```

### GLM-OCR runtime controls

GLM-OCR is a compact 0.5B VLM for document OCR, running on Apple Silicon via MLX.

- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_ENABLE_STUB` (`1` by default): allow the builtin stub runner for tests and lightweight environments.
- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_ENABLE_OCR` (`0` by default): flip to `1` to run the GLM-OCR MLX CLI subprocess.
- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_PYTHON`: Python executable for the GLM-OCR venv.
- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_MODEL_DIR`: local model weights directory (takes precedence over HF model ID).
- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_MLX_MODEL`: HuggingFace MLX model identifier (default `mlx-community/GLM-OCR-4bit`).
- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_MLX_SCRIPT`: path to the MLX CLI inference script for subprocess execution.
- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_DEVICE`: device override (`mps`, `cpu`); auto-detected if unset.

On macOS, the runner tries in-process MLX first (if `mlx_vlm` is importable), then
the MLX CLI subprocess, then the stub.

#### GLM-OCR doctor checks

Run the preflight checker to validate your environment:

```bash
python -m glossapi.ocr.glm_ocr.preflight
```

### OlmOCR-2 runtime controls

#### CUDA / vLLM

- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_ENABLE_STUB` (`1` by default): allow the builtin stub runner for tests and lightweight environments.
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_ENABLE_OCR` (`0` by default): flip to `1` to run the real OlmOCR pipeline (external `olmocr` package).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_PYTHON`: Python executable for the OlmOCR venv.
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MODEL`: HuggingFace model identifier (default `allenai/olmOCR-2-7B-1025-FP8`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MODEL_DIR`: local CUDA model weights directory (takes precedence over HF model ID).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_SERVER`: URL of an external vLLM server (skips spawning a local vLLM instance).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_API_KEY`: API key for external vLLM server.
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_GPU_MEMORY_UTILIZATION`: fraction of VRAM vLLM may pre-allocate for KV-cache (default `0.85`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MAX_MODEL_LEN`: upper bound (tokens) vLLM will allocate KV-cache for (default `8192`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_TENSOR_PARALLEL_SIZE`: tensor parallel size for vLLM (default `1`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_TARGET_IMAGE_DIM`: dimension on longest side used for rendering PDF pages (OlmOCR CLI only).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_WORKERS`: number of OlmOCR pipeline workers (OlmOCR CLI only).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_PAGES_PER_GROUP`: number of PDF pages per work item group (OlmOCR CLI only).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_VLLM_SCRIPT`: path to the vLLM CLI inference script for subprocess execution (default: package-embedded `vllm_cli.py`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_LD_LIBRARY_PATH`: extra library paths prepended to `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` for vLLM/OlmOCR CLI subprocesses (e.g. `/usr/local/cuda/lib64`). Fixes `libcudart.so.12 not found` errors when the CUDA runtime lives outside the default search path.

#### MPS / MLX (macOS Apple Silicon)

- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MLX_MODEL`: HuggingFace MLX model identifier (default `mlx-community/olmOCR-2-7B-1025-4bit`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MLX_MODEL_DIR`: local MLX-formatted model weights directory.
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MLX_SCRIPT`: path to the MLX CLI inference script for subprocess execution.
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_DEVICE`: device override (`cuda`, `mps`, `cpu`); auto-detected if unset.

#### Strategy cascade

The runner tries strategies in this order:

1. **In-process MLX** (macOS only, if `mlx_vlm` is importable)
2. **MLX CLI subprocess** (macOS only)
3. **In-process vLLM** (Linux/CUDA only, if `vllm` is importable and CUDA is available)
4. **vLLM CLI subprocess** (Linux/CUDA only)
5. **OlmOCR CLI subprocess** (requires `olmocr` package and `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_ENABLE_OCR=1`)
6. **Stub** (default fallback for testing)

On macOS, strategies 3–4 are skipped. On Linux, strategies 1–2 are skipped.

#### OlmOCR doctor checks

Run the preflight checker to validate your environment:

```bash
python -m glossapi.ocr.olmocr.preflight
```

## Math Enrichment (Phase‑2)

- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_EARLYSTOP` = `1|0` (default 1): enable/disable early‑stop wrapper.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_MAX_CHARS` (default `3000`): cap decoded LaTeX length.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_MAX_REPEAT` (default `50`): stop on last‑token repetition runs.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_MAX_NEW_TOKENS` (optional): cap decoder new tokens.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_LEN_STRIDE` (default `16`): stride for length checks.
- `GLOSSAPI_MATH_RESPAWN_CAP` (default `5`): maximum number of times a crashed math worker is respawned per GPU during multi‑GPU enrichment (set to `0` to disable respawns).

### Centralized LaTeX Policy (Post‑processing)

- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_POST_ONLY_FAILED` = `1|0` (default `1`): only sanitize when output looks problematic.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_POST_REPEAT_GATE` (default `50`): consider output failed if tail token repeats more than this.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_POST_WINDDOWN` (default `12`): clamp repeated tail token to this run length.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_POST_MAX_CHARS` (default `3000`): cap text length (prefers whitespace/`\` boundary).

All LaTeX policy knobs are loaded via `glossapi.text_sanitize.load_latex_policy()` and used consistently in early‑stop, Phase‑2 post‑processing, and metrics.

## Performance & Caches

- `OMP_NUM_THREADS` / `MKL_NUM_THREADS`: cap CPU threads to avoid oversubscription.
- Cache locations: `HF_HOME`, `XDG_CACHE_HOME`, `DOCLING_CACHE_DIR`.

## Apple Vision Framework (macOS only)

GlossAPI ships a utility module that wraps Apple's `VNRecognizeTextRequest` as a drop-in
alternative OCR path that routes entirely through the **Neural Engine (ANE)** without any
Python-managed GPU memory allocation.

Install the Objective-C bridge:

```bash
pip install pyobjc-framework-Vision pyobjc-framework-Quartz
```

Usage:

```python
from glossapi.ocr.utils.vision_ocr import recognize_pages_parallel, is_available

if is_available():
    records = recognize_pages_parallel(
        [pil_page_1, pil_page_2],
        recognition_level="accurate",   # full ANE VLM model; or "fast" for lighter model
        languages=["el-GR", "en-US"],   # Greek-first, GlossAPI defaults
    )
    for r in records:
        print(r.text, r.confidence)     # TextRecord.page_index identifies the source page
```

`recognize_pages_parallel` submits all pages to a `ThreadPoolExecutor` that releases the
GIL while Vision drives the ANE, overlapping pypdfium2 page decoding (CPU) with ANE inference
continuously.

This path is independent of ONNX / CoreMLExecutionProvider — it calls Vision directly and has
no dependency on `onnxruntime`.  It is most useful when the ONNX path cannot be used
(e.g., in a minimal environment without `onnxruntime`, or when CoreML compilation
fails on a new macOS release).

## Worker Logging

- `GLOSSAPI_WORKER_LOG_DIR`: override the directory used for per-worker logs and `gpu<N>.current` markers (defaults to `logs/ocr_workers/` or `logs/math_workers/` under the output directory).
- `GLOSSAPI_WORKER_LOG_VERBOSE` = `1|0` (default `1`): emit (or suppress) the GPU binding banner each worker prints on startup.

## RapidOCR Model Paths

- `GLOSSAPI_RAPIDOCR_ONNX_DIR`: directory containing `det/rec/cls` ONNX models and keys.

## Triage & Parquet

- Triage always writes both:
  - Sidecar summaries: `sidecars/triage/{stem}.json` (per document)
  - Parquet updates: `download_results/download_results.parquet` (adds/updates rows)
- Default recommendation policy: enrich if `formula_total > 0` (skip only no‑math docs).
- Legacy heuristic (p90/pages thresholds) can be enabled with `GLOSSAPI_TRIAGE_HEURISTIC=1`.

## Skiplist

- `GLOSSAPI_SKIPLIST_PATH`: override the path to the fatal skip-list file (defaults to `<output_dir>/skiplists/fatal_skip.txt`).
- Files on the skip-list are never retried. Remove entries manually or use `reprocess_completed=True` to force reprocessing of non-fatal stems.

Commit message:

feat: Enhance MinerU configuration with new environment variables for improved memory management and performance on Apple Silicon

docs/configuration.md, after:

# Configuration & Environment Variables

This page lists the main knobs you can use to tune GlossAPI.

## GPU & Providers

- `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES`: restrict/assign visible GPUs, e.g. `export CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0,1`.
- `GLOSSAPI_DOCLING_DEVICE`: preferred device for Docling (inside a worker), e.g. `cuda:0`.
- `GLOSSAPI_GPU_BATCH_SIZE`: batch size for GPU extraction workers (multi-GPU mode).
- macOS Apple Silicon (Metal/MPS): use `accel_type='MPS'` or set `GLOSSAPI_DOCLING_DEVICE=mps` for the
  `c.extract()` path.  When calling `c.ocr(backend='rapidocr')` the accelerator is **auto-detected**
  (`mps` on macOS, `cuda` on Linux/Windows when available, `auto` otherwise) — no explicit
  `accel_type` argument is required for that code path.
- `DOCLING_PERF_PAGE_BATCH_SIZE`: number of PDF pages Docling processes per Metal/CUDA dispatch iteration.
  Defaults to `32` on macOS Apple Silicon and `16` on all other platforms.  Larger values amortise
  per-dispatch scheduling overhead on M-series hardware.  Override to tune for your document size:
  ```bash
  export DOCLING_PERF_PAGE_BATCH_SIZE=64  # very long PDFs on Apple Silicon
  ```

## Model Weights

All model weights are stored under a single root directory controlled by `GLOSSAPI_WEIGHTS_ROOT`:

- `GLOSSAPI_WEIGHTS_ROOT`: root directory for all model weights (default: `<repo>/model_weights`). Each backend stores weights in a subdirectory:

```
model_weights/              # $GLOSSAPI_WEIGHTS_ROOT
├── deepseek-ocr/           # DeepSeek OCR V1 CUDA/vLLM weights
├── deepseek-ocr-1-mlx/     # DeepSeek OCR V1 MLX weights (macOS Apple Silicon)
├── deepseek-ocr-mlx/       # DeepSeek OCR v2 MLX weights
├── glm-ocr-mlx/            # GLM-OCR MLX weights
├── olmocr/                 # OlmOCR-2 CUDA/vLLM weights
├── olmocr-mlx/             # OlmOCR-2 MLX weights (macOS Apple Silicon)
└── mineru/                 # MinerU PDF-Extract-Kit models
```

Individual backend directories can be overridden with their respective env vars (e.g. `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_MODEL_DIR`, `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_MODEL_DIR`, `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_MODEL_DIR`, `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MLX_MODEL_DIR`) for advanced use cases. When set, they take precedence over the weights root convention. In most setups only `GLOSSAPI_WEIGHTS_ROOT` is needed.

## OCR & Parsing

- `GLOSSAPI_IMAGES_SCALE`: image scale hint for OCR/layout (default ~1.1–1.25).
- `GLOSSAPI_FORMULA_BATCH`: inline CodeFormula batch size (default `16`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OCR_LANGS`: override OCR language list (comma-separated).
- `GLOSSAPI_SKIP_DOCLING_BOOT`: set to `1` to skip Docling/RapidOCR patching at import time (useful in environments without Docling).

### Batch Policy & PDF Backend

GlossAPI exposes two Phase‑1 profiles. Use `Corpus.extract(..., phase1_backend='docling')` to switch from the default safe backend. The legacy environment variables `GLOSSAPI_BATCH_POLICY` and `GLOSSAPI_BATCH_MAX` are still parsed for backward compatibility but emit a deprecation warning and will be removed in a future release.

Regardless of backend, the extractor clamps OMP/OpenBLAS/MKL pools to one thread per worker so multi‑GPU runs do not explode thread counts.

### DeepSeek-OCR optional dependencies

Install the CUDA/vLLM extras to enable the DeepSeek-OCR path on Linux with an
NVIDIA GPU.  Imports remain lazy, so the package itself is always optional.

```bash
pip install '.[deepseek-ocr]'

# Install Torch CUDA 12.1 wheels (required by the DeepSeek-OCR script)
pip install --extra-index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu121 \
  'torch==2.5.1+cu121' 'torchvision==0.20.1+cu121'

# Alternatively, use the requirements file (edit to uncomment torch lines):
pip install -r deepseek-ocr/requirements-deepseek-ocr.txt
```

**Apple Silicon / MPS path** — on macOS, DeepSeek-OCR (V1) runs via
[mlx-vlm](https://github.com/Blaizzy/mlx-vlm) without vLLM.  No CUDA wheel is
needed.  Install the MPS extras instead:

```bash
pip install '.[deepseek-ocr-mlx]'
```

The model (`mlx-community/DeepSeek-OCR-8bit`) is downloaded automatically on
first use.  To keep it locally, set `GLOSSAPI_WEIGHTS_ROOT` pointing at your
weights directory; the model will be cached under
`<weights_root>/deepseek-ocr-1-mlx/`.

When using `backend='deepseek-ocr'`, equations are included inline in the OCR output; Phase‑2 math flags are accepted but skipped.

When using `backend='deepseek-ocr-2'`, equations are included inline in the OCR output; Phase-2 math flags are accepted but skipped.

When using `backend='mineru'`, equations are included inline in the OCR output; Phase‑2 math flags are accepted but skipped.

### DeepSeek-OCR runtime controls

The runner auto-detects the platform and selects the right execution path:

| Platform | Strategies tried (in order) |
|---|---|
| macOS (Apple Silicon) | In-process MLX → MLX CLI subprocess → stub |
| Linux / Windows (CUDA) | vLLM CLI subprocess → stub |

**Common controls:**

- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_ENABLE_STUB` (`1` by default): allow the builtin stub runner for tests and lightweight environments.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_DEVICE`: force device selection — `mps`, `cuda`, or `cpu`.  Auto-detected when unset (`mps` on macOS, `cuda` elsewhere).

**MPS / MLX controls (Apple Silicon):**

- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_ENABLE_MLX_OCR` (`1` by default on the MPS path): set to `0` to skip the MLX CLI subprocess strategy, or `1` to force it even when the kwarg says otherwise.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_MLX_MODEL_DIR`: local directory containing MLX-formatted weights and `config.json`. If unset, weights are resolved from `GLOSSAPI_WEIGHTS_ROOT/deepseek-ocr-1-mlx/` or auto-downloaded from `mlx-community/DeepSeek-OCR-8bit`.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_MLX_MODEL`: HuggingFace model ID for auto-download (default `mlx-community/DeepSeek-OCR-8bit`).
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_MLX_SCRIPT`: override path to the MLX CLI inference script. By default the package-shipped `mlx_cli.py` is used.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_TEST_PYTHON` / `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_PYTHON`: Python executable for the MLX CLI subprocess (defaults to the current interpreter).

**CUDA / vLLM controls (Linux):**

- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_ENABLE_OCR` (`0` by default): flip to `1` to force the real vLLM CLI even when the stub is allowed.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_VLLM_SCRIPT`: override path to the DeepSeek-OCR vLLM CLI script (defaults to `deepseek-ocr/run_pdf_ocr_vllm.py` under the repo).
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_MODEL_DIR`: path to CUDA model weights (must contain `config.json` + safetensors).
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_LD_LIBRARY_PATH`: prepend extra library search paths (e.g., for `libjpeg-turbo`) when launching the CLI.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_GPU_MEMORY_UTILIZATION`: VRAM fraction (0.5–0.9) for vLLM.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK_OCR_NO_FP8_KV`: set to `1` to disable FP8 KV cache (propagates `--no-fp8-kv`).

### DeepSeek OCR v2 (MLX/MPS) runtime controls

The runner tries three strategies in order: **in-process** (fast, model stays loaded), **CLI subprocess**, then **stub**.

- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_ENABLE_STUB` (`1` by default): allow the builtin stub runner for tests and lightweight environments.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_ENABLE_OCR` (`0` by default): flip to `1` to force the CLI subprocess strategy.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_MODEL_DIR`: model directory containing MLX-formatted weights and config. If unset, models are auto-downloaded from `mlx-community/DeepSeek-OCR-2-8bit` on HuggingFace.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_DEVICE`: device override (`mps` or `cpu`, default `mps`).
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_MLX_SCRIPT`: override path to an external MLX CLI script. Only needed when using a separate venv or custom script. By default the package-shipped script is used.
- `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_PYTHON` / `GLOSSAPI_DEEPSEEK2_TEST_PYTHON`: absolute path to the Python interpreter for CLI subprocess mode (defaults to the current interpreter).

### MinerU runtime controls

- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_ENABLE_STUB` (`1` by default): allow the builtin stub runner for tests and lightweight environments.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_ENABLE_OCR` (`0` by default): flip to `1` to run `magic-pdf` when available.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_COMMAND`: override the `magic-pdf` executable path.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_MODE`: override the MinerU mode flag (passed to `magic-pdf -m`, default `auto`).
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_BACKEND`: override the MinerU backend (passed to `magic-pdf -b`, e.g. `pipeline`, `hybrid-auto-engine`, `vlm`).
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_DEVICE_MODE`: override the MinerU device mode (`mps`, `cuda`, or `cpu`). Requires `MINERU_TOOLS_CONFIG_JSON` to point at the base config.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_MPS_HIGH_WATERMARK_RATIO` (default `0.0`): controls `PYTORCH_MPS_HIGH_WATERMARK_RATIO` injected into the `magic-pdf` subprocess on macOS/MPS. `0.0` (the default) disables PyTorch's budget-based GC entirely — instead of firing synchronous in-process sweeps that stall the GPU command queue, PyTorch relies on macOS system memory pressure events (asynchronous, no GPU idle). PyTorch's own default is `1.7` (GC fires after allocating 1.7× the recommended budget). Any ratio-based GC adds stall overhead during MFR autoregressive decoding; the OS pressure mechanism avoids this. Set to `off` to skip injection and revert to PyTorch's 1.7 default. Set to any float > 0 (e.g. `1.0`) to use ratio-based GC at that threshold.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_MPS_LOW_WATERMARK_RATIO`: only relevant when high watermark > 0. Controls the drain target after GC fires. When high is `0.0`, this var is ignored. Auto-computed as `high - 0.2` when not set explicitly.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_FORMULA_ENABLE`: set to `0` to skip formula recognition (MFR / UniMerNet) entirely — useful for text-only documents where formulae are absent and the MFR pass is a no-op. Set to `1` to force-enable regardless of the base `magic-pdf.json`. Injected as `formula-config.enable`.
- `GLOSSAPI_MINERU_TABLE_ENABLE`: set to `0` to skip table extraction. Set to `1` to force-enable. Injected as `table-config.enable`.
- `VIRTUAL_VRAM_SIZE`: MinerU env var (no `GLOSSAPI_` prefix) that overrides the detected GPU memory (in GiB) used to compute `batch_ratio`, which scales the number of formula crops per MFR inference batch. On MPS, MinerU assigns `batch_ratio=1` (16 crops/batch) by default. After running `setup_glossapi.sh --mode mineru`, GlossAPI patches the MPS branch of `doc_analyze_by_custom_model.py` and automatically injects `VIRTUAL_VRAM_SIZE` based on detected physical RAM (`8–15 GiB → "6"`, `16–23 GiB → "8"`, `≥ 24 GiB → "12"`), raising `batch_ratio` to ~2–4 and improving sustained MFR throughput. Override by setting `VIRTUAL_VRAM_SIZE` manually before running the pipeline.
- `MINERU_MIN_BATCH_INFERENCE_SIZE` (default `384` in MinerU, overridden to `500` by GlossAPI setup): number of pages processed per inference chunk. MinerU runs the full model stack (Layout, MFD, MFR, OCR) per chunk. Set above your document's page count to avoid mid-document splits and the associated Layout/MFD re-warmup overhead.

#### MinerU doctor checks

Run the preflight checker to validate your CLI, config, device, and model paths:

```bash
python -m glossapi.ocr.mineru.preflight
```

### GLM-OCR runtime controls

GLM-OCR is a compact 0.5B VLM for document OCR, running on Apple Silicon via MLX.

- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_ENABLE_STUB` (`1` by default): allow the builtin stub runner for tests and lightweight environments.
- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_ENABLE_OCR` (`0` by default): flip to `1` to run the GLM-OCR MLX CLI subprocess.
- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_PYTHON`: Python executable for the GLM-OCR venv.
- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_MODEL_DIR`: local model weights directory (takes precedence over HF model ID).
- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_MLX_MODEL`: HuggingFace MLX model identifier (default `mlx-community/GLM-OCR-4bit`).
- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_MLX_SCRIPT`: path to the MLX CLI inference script for subprocess execution.
- `GLOSSAPI_GLMOCR_DEVICE`: device override (`mps`, `cpu`); auto-detected if unset.

On macOS, the runner tries in-process MLX first (if `mlx_vlm` is importable), then
the MLX CLI subprocess, then the stub.

#### GLM-OCR doctor checks

Run the preflight checker to validate your environment:

```bash
python -m glossapi.ocr.glm_ocr.preflight
```

### OlmOCR-2 runtime controls

#### CUDA / vLLM

- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_ENABLE_STUB` (`1` by default): allow the builtin stub runner for tests and lightweight environments.
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_ENABLE_OCR` (`0` by default): flip to `1` to run the real OlmOCR pipeline (external `olmocr` package).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_PYTHON`: Python executable for the OlmOCR venv.
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MODEL`: HuggingFace model identifier (default `allenai/olmOCR-2-7B-1025-FP8`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MODEL_DIR`: local CUDA model weights directory (takes precedence over HF model ID).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_SERVER`: URL of an external vLLM server (skips spawning a local vLLM instance).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_API_KEY`: API key for external vLLM server.
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_GPU_MEMORY_UTILIZATION`: fraction of VRAM vLLM may pre-allocate for KV-cache (default `0.85`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MAX_MODEL_LEN`: upper bound (tokens) vLLM will allocate KV-cache for (default `8192`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_TENSOR_PARALLEL_SIZE`: tensor parallel size for vLLM (default `1`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_TARGET_IMAGE_DIM`: dimension on longest side used for rendering PDF pages (OlmOCR CLI only).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_WORKERS`: number of OlmOCR pipeline workers (OlmOCR CLI only).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_PAGES_PER_GROUP`: number of PDF pages per work item group (OlmOCR CLI only).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_VLLM_SCRIPT`: path to the vLLM CLI inference script for subprocess execution (default: package-embedded `vllm_cli.py`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_LD_LIBRARY_PATH`: extra library paths prepended to `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` for vLLM/OlmOCR CLI subprocesses (e.g. `/usr/local/cuda/lib64`). Fixes `libcudart.so.12 not found` errors when the CUDA runtime lives outside the default search path.

#### MPS / MLX (macOS Apple Silicon)

- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MLX_MODEL`: HuggingFace MLX model identifier (default `mlx-community/olmOCR-2-7B-1025-4bit`).
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MLX_MODEL_DIR`: local MLX-formatted model weights directory.
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_MLX_SCRIPT`: path to the MLX CLI inference script for subprocess execution.
- `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_DEVICE`: device override (`cuda`, `mps`, `cpu`); auto-detected if unset.

#### Strategy cascade

The runner tries strategies in this order:

1. **In-process MLX** (macOS only, if `mlx_vlm` is importable)
2. **MLX CLI subprocess** (macOS only)
3. **In-process vLLM** (Linux/CUDA only, if `vllm` is importable and CUDA is available)
4. **vLLM CLI subprocess** (Linux/CUDA only)
5. **OlmOCR CLI subprocess** (requires `olmocr` package and `GLOSSAPI_OLMOCR_ENABLE_OCR=1`)
6. **Stub** (default fallback for testing)

On macOS, strategies 3–4 are skipped. On Linux, strategies 1–2 are skipped.

#### OlmOCR doctor checks

Run the preflight checker to validate your environment:

```bash
python -m glossapi.ocr.olmocr.preflight
```

## Math Enrichment (Phase‑2)

- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_EARLYSTOP` = `1|0` (default 1): enable/disable early‑stop wrapper.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_MAX_CHARS` (default `3000`): cap decoded LaTeX length.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_MAX_REPEAT` (default `50`): stop on last‑token repetition runs.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_MAX_NEW_TOKENS` (optional): cap decoder new tokens.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_LEN_STRIDE` (default `16`): stride for length checks.
- `GLOSSAPI_MATH_RESPAWN_CAP` (default `5`): maximum number of times a crashed math worker is respawned per GPU during multi‑GPU enrichment (set to `0` to disable respawns).

### Centralized LaTeX Policy (Post‑processing)

- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_POST_ONLY_FAILED` = `1|0` (default `1`): only sanitize when output looks problematic.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_POST_REPEAT_GATE` (default `50`): consider output failed if tail token repeats more than this.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_POST_WINDDOWN` (default `12`): clamp repeated tail token to this run length.
- `GLOSSAPI_LATEX_POST_MAX_CHARS` (default `3000`): cap text length (prefers whitespace/`\` boundary).

All LaTeX policy knobs are loaded via `glossapi.text_sanitize.load_latex_policy()` and used consistently in early‑stop, Phase‑2 post‑processing, and metrics.

## Performance & Caches

- `OMP_NUM_THREADS` / `MKL_NUM_THREADS`: cap CPU threads to avoid oversubscription.
- Cache locations: `HF_HOME`, `XDG_CACHE_HOME`, `DOCLING_CACHE_DIR`.

## Apple Vision Framework (macOS only)

GlossAPI ships a utility module that wraps Apple's `VNRecognizeTextRequest` as a drop-in
alternative OCR path that routes entirely through the **Neural Engine (ANE)** without any
Python-managed GPU memory allocation.

Install the Objective-C bridge:

```bash
pip install pyobjc-framework-Vision pyobjc-framework-Quartz
```

Usage:

```python
from glossapi.ocr.utils.vision_ocr import recognize_pages_parallel, is_available

if is_available():
    records = recognize_pages_parallel(
        [pil_page_1, pil_page_2],
        recognition_level="accurate",   # full ANE VLM model; or "fast" for lighter model
        languages=["el-GR", "en-US"],   # Greek-first, GlossAPI defaults
    )
    for r in records:
        print(r.text, r.confidence)     # TextRecord.page_index identifies the source page
```

`recognize_pages_parallel` submits all pages to a `ThreadPoolExecutor` that releases the
GIL while Vision drives the ANE, overlapping pypdfium2 page decoding (CPU) with ANE inference
continuously.

This path is independent of ONNX / CoreMLExecutionProvider — it calls Vision directly and has
no dependency on `onnxruntime`.  It is most useful when the ONNX path cannot be used
(e.g., in a minimal environment without `onnxruntime`, or when CoreML compilation
fails on a new macOS release).

## Worker Logging

- `GLOSSAPI_WORKER_LOG_DIR`: override the directory used for per-worker logs and `gpu<N>.current` markers (defaults to `logs/ocr_workers/` or `logs/math_workers/` under the output directory).
- `GLOSSAPI_WORKER_LOG_VERBOSE` = `1|0` (default `1`): emit (or suppress) the GPU binding banner each worker prints on startup.

## RapidOCR Model Paths

- `GLOSSAPI_RAPIDOCR_ONNX_DIR`: directory containing `det/rec/cls` ONNX models and keys.

## Triage & Parquet

- Triage always writes both:
  - Sidecar summaries: `sidecars/triage/{stem}.json` (per document)
  - Parquet updates: `download_results/download_results.parquet` (adds/updates rows)
- Default recommendation policy: enrich if `formula_total > 0` (skip only no‑math docs).
- Legacy heuristic (p90/pages thresholds) can be enabled with `GLOSSAPI_TRIAGE_HEURISTIC=1`.

## Skiplist

- `GLOSSAPI_SKIPLIST_PATH`: override the path to the fatal skip-list file (defaults to `<output_dir>/skiplists/fatal_skip.txt`).
- Files on the skip-list are never retried. Remove entries manually or use `reprocess_completed=True` to force reprocessing of non-fatal stems.
